[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When we look at
this truth of life,
and we look at what it
takes in order to thrive,
what we understand is that
if we're out of balance,
out of tune with
our true nature,
and we don't understand the laws
of nature that govern our life,
then we become imbalanced.
Disconnection from
the flow of life,
from the flow of life force,
from the flow of our energy--
that is the set up for
disharmony and disease.
>> Disease in Ayurveda
is defined as imbalance
in our doshas.
The imbalance is caused
with extraneous factors
and intrinsic factors.
There could be
imbalances because
of our genetic composition,
our genetic tendencies, that
can be triggered
because of how we live,
what we put in our body.
>> When people feel stuck in
their lives, in their bodies,
on any of these
layers of the self,
Ayurveda describes this
stuck physical matter
in the digestive tract as ama.
Ama is the product of
anything that's undigested.
It is gunk factor that
accumulates on any
of the layers of the self.
>> Ayurveda also has
this wonderful knowledge
of digestion.
And so understanding digestion
doesn't just apply to food.
It applies to emotion.
It applies to everything that
we take in through the senses.
All of life gets metabolized.
And if we're able to do
that efficiently, if we're
able to do that thoroughly,
then we have vibrancy.
If not, then we have stress.
The ancient sages understood
that consciousness comes out
of this underlying unified
field in different frequencies.
And they had this
concept of blockages.
The free flow of that
intelligence and that energy,
if it gets blocked, that is
what we call ama in Ayurveda.
The blockages can be on any
level, from the spiritual,
to the mental blocks,
to the emotional blocks,
energetic blocks, to
the physical blocks.
And those will
affect, ultimately,
that perfect expression
of our physiology
that we were designed
to be manifesting.
So ama are those
blockages that will
get in the way of us manifesting
that perfect physiology,
that perfect wholeness
into our life.
>> So we can talk about ama,
which will be undigested food
in the digestive tract.
It travels throughout the
body on the blood stream.
It gets lodged in
places in the body.
And it creates chronic
illness and chronic pain.
>> The first stage of the
disease is accumulation
of toxins.
That will increase, vitiate.
We call it vitiation.
And then it flows into
the areas of your body
where you have
the weakest links.
And once it flows to those
areas, there is stagnation.
And then there is
manifestation of a disease.
>> The doshas-- from an
Ayurveda perspective,
we look at them in terms
of five elementals, right?
And it's when they
become imbalanced--
they like to find weakened
tissues and take up residence.
And that's where we'll
see physical symptom come
about inside the body.
Too much water element,
we'll see edema, swelling.
Too much earth element, we'll
see blockage, not enough flow,
and the creation of a
growth-- like a cyst, a tumor,
or cancer.
>> Likewise, we can also
have undigested emotion.
And that will cause
us a lot of pain.
As we repress those emotions, we
don't deal with those emotions,
we can have undigested stress.
We can have undigested thought.
So while we want to take
measures to strengthen
our physical
digestion, we also want
to take measures to
strengthen emotional digestion
and mental digestion.
So this is why meditation is
such a key aspect to Ayurveda
as a holistic science.
>> So in what way
does diet, yoga,
and meditation help to take care
of this thing in Ayurveda we
call ama?
A lot of ama, or blockage in
the flow, begins energetically.
So if we're fine-tuning
with yogic and meditation
techniques, our inner
core frequency--
meaning our nervous system
and the state of the mind--
being able to shed
and release emotions
that we don't need to carry on,
that are not beneficial for us,
and then tune in
with proper diet.
These three things,
very much so,
help to regulate ama production
in the body and proper disposal
of it.
One of the beautiful things
of just doing simple Sun
Salutations is that it
squeezes every muscle
in your entire body,
which squeezes and moves
the lymphatic system
inside the body.
We have this beautiful heart
inside of us which pulses.
And with each pulse,
blood gets driven
throughout the entire body.
But the lymphatic
system is something
that needs to be
squeezed and pumped.
>> It's on the
level of meditation,
which in Ayurvedic terms, is
connecting directly to source.
It is something that
allows us to release
a lot of the egoic
patterning that
can serve as frequent triggers
for stressful reactions.
And so that direct
connection to source
creates for us this
thing that we call ojas.
Ojas is that liveliness,
that glow of health
that comes when we have that
connection, when we're strongly
connected to our life
force and into our source.
So ultimately, ojas
is an expression
that comes to the
physiology from the highest
level of our existence.
So we have, then, really
three imperatives for health.
Our connection to
source has to be strong.
There has to be no blockages.
And we have to have
balance, in terms
of how that energy expresses
itself in the physiology.
>> So in our innermost self,
the self that is most connected
and closest to consciousness,
is our body of bliss.
And this is really the
closest to our true self.
And for us to be truly healthy,
truly well in a holistic way,
the light that is
consciousness shines
through all of these
layers of ourselves--
through our bliss body,
through our karmic body,
through our mental
perceptive body,
through our energetic body,
and into our physical body.
The state of bliss
is a state of truth.
It's not just an over-layering
of false positivity
or a grasping of happiness.
It's when experience
and emotion and food
is all metabolized and digested.
And the product
of that digestion
on all the layers of the
self is this deep state
of consciousness, of alignment,
of truth, and of, we could say,
light shining through
an individual.
>> From an Ayurvedic
perspective,
feeling vital health inside
your body in balance--
what does that look like?
Waking up and feeling
energetic and not
sluggish in the morning,
that's a big piece.
Being able to step
into your day feeling
grounded into your body,
and not in an anxious place,
feeling really positive
inside yourself.
Your energetics throughout the
day, ideally, are sustained.
And your mental state is
in a beautiful place--
not to focus on negative
thought patterns
and being more in
service to the world.
>> Vitality in Ayurveda
is called prana.
So when we are depleted
in our vitality,
we just cannot
function properly.
We experience symptoms like
fatigue, lack of energy,
and just not motivated
to do anything.
And the way in Ayurveda is to
boost or vitality or our prana.
We can do that by getting the
right amount of sleep every day
and by eating healthy
foods, and also by being
in sync with the nature.
That's very important.
Waking up early
morning and meditating
as soon as we get
out of our bed,
we actually salute mother Earth.
And then we cleanse ourself.
And when we cleanse ourself,
we appreciate who they are.
And we also appreciate
the divine within us.
>> One of the things that we
encourage patients and clients
to do is to use their intuition,
be able to become sensitive
to what it is that's happening
within the physiology.
So it's one thing to
have general guidelines.
It's another thing to
have that consciousness.
>> Right from childhood, we
are all nothing but conditioned
beings.
So it is how we want
to condition ourselves.
Do we want to be
conditioned to chaos that's
going to create imbalance?
Or do we want to be
conditioned to being
with the rhythm of nature and in
harmony with our body and mind?
That is a question that
we need to ask ourselves.
And when we do that,
it's OK to take time.
And this is lunchtime.
It is my personal time
with my food, which
is going to help me
increase my vitality
and fill me up with this
energy that I need to perform.
You're going to be very
effective in whatever
you do if you increase
your vitality,
and to also focus
on your breath.
Sometimes we are
put in situations
that we have to work
hard these days,
and we have to
over-work ourselves.
Watch how you are breathing.
You will notice,
when you're going
through these type of emotions
your breath becomes shallow,
and the types of thoughts
you're engaged in.
Take a break.
Break the circuit.
Create that space between
you and your thoughts.
And anchor yourself
with your breath.
When you do that every day
for about even 10 minutes,
there is a big difference.
If you have to go to work,
you cannot find time,
sit in your car in the
parking lot and do it.
You will be only with yourself
there, before you go to work.
If you have to face
a stressful day
or if you have to face that
boss who you don't like,
get into that quiet space
first before you go.
You're going to feel
a whole lot better.
How can you run a car
without gas, right?
So vitality is nothing
but the gas, the energy,
the battery that
we need to charge
to function the way we need
to function, optimally,
and produce real good effects.
>> This is why consciousness
and its development is
so fundamental in Ayurveda.
With that enhanced
awareness, we can
listen to the
intelligence of the body
and know what qualities
it is calling for,
what diet it needs,
and therefore
empower ourselves with a diet
that is truly uniquely ours.
>> When it comes to food
and accessing more radiance,
more prana, more vitality,
more life energy,
we often say that the
consciousness of the cook is
the most important ingredient.
Of course, beyond that, we
want to eat consciously,
because that allows
us to digest food.
And digested food will create
more liveliness, more vitality
in the body.
>> So the idea is to choose
foods and lifestyle activities
that align you with your
natural constitution.
And if we live by
these rules, usually we
don't stray too much to be
creating an excess amount
of ama in the body.
>> When your vitality is
high, you're energized.
You're really high, motivated,
happy, joyful, positive,
healthy.
And you flow.
You flow.
Nothing is an obstacle.
You're not stressed.
That is why it becomes
very important for us
to know our constitution
and to keep it in balance.
Our body is like a
temple, and how you
want to treat that is up to us.
>> Don't forget to explore the
rest of this series by watching
our docu-series, yoga
practices, meditations,
and self-care videos.